---
date: "2019-03-09"
title: Making Education Accessible Through Community
description: >-
  Open source and community can fuel the change required to make education widely accessible
---

`Reposted from a FreeCodeCamp article I authored. `

Technological innovations, like those from Boston Dynamics, offer a glimpse of exciting growth and
change in the near future! Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) are growing in many
ways. New technologies drive change in traditional industries, stimulate job growth, and
revolutionize education. From advanced research to elementary-school classrooms, our world is
changing as technology becomes more prevalent.

The Education Commission of the States (ECS) has reported that STEM related industries will
experience 13% job growth from 2017 to 2027. Within that category, computer related industries will
grow the most at 14%. In comparison, the average growth is expected to be 9%. Median hourly earnings
are $38.85 for STEM-related careers, compared to the $19.30 average. That’s a difference of over
\$40,000 in yearly income assuming a 40-hour work week. Unemployment is also half of the average
(2.2% vs. 5.5%). This all seems great! Fantastic job growth, high pay, and low unemployment. One key
challenge to rain on this STEM parade is that many of those jobs could go unfilled in the future. In
manufacturing alone, 3.5 million jobs will be needed by 2025, with nearly 2 million going unfilled.

The most commonly cited cause for this disparity is that workers will not be qualified enough to
fill those roles. This leads us to wonder, what can be done to prepare workers for those jobs? The
demand for STEM education is understood by parents and students. 90% of students expect their future
job will require some computer science knowledge. 85% of parents agree. Parents from low-income
families (\$54,000 or less yearly income) are twice as likely to find computer science more
important than required courses. Despite the demand from industry, students, and parents, 47% of
principals reported their schools don’t offer coding courses. 53% don’t offer robotics. 44% of
principals state a lack of teachers is why they don’t offer computer science. Of those principals,
40% state there is a teacher available in their schools who could teach computer science. Refer to
the table below for other reasons Computer Science isn’t offered:

Traditional education has done many great things in preparing students for the future, but has
struggled in many ways. Notably, an over-emphasis on testing is a barrier to coding and other STEM
courses. We may have to look outside the classroom for a solution. Community-driven and open-source
movements have revolutionized many industries. Being open-source means that the software, hardware,
or whatever it might be is freely available and can be redistributed or modified. This allows
information to be shared for the benefit of all. Many open-source projects are created as hundreds
of individuals work together to create a useful tool. Wikipedia is an example common to most of us.
Many companies drive astounding impact by contributing to open source. Below are a few companies
(and some of their projects):

- GitHub
- Google (Android, TensorFlow, Chromium, Dart, Go)
- Linux
- Microsoft (Visual Studio Code, .NET dev tools, TypeScript)
- Automattic — Creators of WordPress

Let’s analyze two organizations that are teaching STEM through community and open-source.

## freeCodeCamp

freeCodeCamp stands at the forefront of many organizations who teach coding. Founded in 2014 by
Quincy Larson, freeCodeCamp has experienced outstanding growth. Highlighted below are a few key
stats: 1 billion user minutes across all their platforms. That’s 2000 years! More visitors than
CodeAcademy (which has a $47 million valuation)
More visitors than Udacity (which has a $1 billion
valuation) 54,500 Alumni with thousands now working in computer related industries Curriculum
translated into Arabic, Chinese, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish It’d be easy to assume
freeCodeCamp had hundreds of employees and was heavily funded! Actually, it’s quite the opposite. As
of December 2018, freeCodeCamp has 5 employees and an operating budget of \$200,000. It is a
501(c)(3) non-profit. For more info on freeCodeCamp, check out this medium post. How can 5 people do
all that? Well, to put it simply, they don’t. At least not alone. Over 650 volunteers contribute to
all that growth! Many graduates (and current students) use their newly acquired knowledge to give
back. Through Open Source for Good, freeCodeCamp also helps their students contribute to other open
source or non profit organizations. Although most users are adults, an increasing number of
educators are using it. freeCodeCamp is adding a classroom mode and tools for study groups as
donations and volunteering increases! freeCodeCamp is educating thousands at home or in the
classroom. People are learning then giving back, driving viral growth for this amazing organization.
Following this model, we’re going to look at Khan Academy!

## Khan Academy

Another fantastic example of community-driven change is more widely known: Khan Academy. To briefly
sum up their story, Sal Khan started tutoring family members who were struggling with science and
math. As more family asked for his help, he posted videos on YouTube. He also created a website
where they could do practice problems. More and more people found his resources. He was soon noticed
by Bill Gates and Google. Backed by a passionate community, Khan Academy began to reach more and
more people. Through volunteer content creators and translators, they now reach hundreds of
thousands of students in over 100 countries. According to Sal Khan, Khan Academy was never designed
to replace traditional classroom education. It is meant to supplement it by providing tools for
teachers and students. Machine learning can create individualized and effective learning plans by
analyzing data from students quizzes and Khan Academy practice. Teachers, now equipped with these
plans, can better concentrate their efforts on each student! A few stats about Khan Academy from
their website: Students who complete 60% of their grade-level math on Khan Academy experience 1.8
times the expected growth on the NWEA MAP Test, a popular assessment test 64% of first-generation
college students reported Khan Academy was meaningful to their education (164 surveyed) Check out
this Google Talk to learn more about this wonderful organization!

By empowering individuals through accessible resources, real change can be achieved. As communities
develop around similar beliefs and goals, thousands are taught and are then able to teach. This
process of learning and giving back is key to educating future generations. Everyone, everywhere has
the potential to learn difficult concepts, given the right community and resources. We can help make
those resources globally accessible by donating to these communities. Donations don’t have to be
financial. By giving our time, talent, and energy, we can support open-source and community-driven
organizations that are causing real global change. I have been personally impacted by both of these
organizations. I learned to code primarily through freeCodeCamp. I now enjoy a fulfilling job doing
web development. I give back by translating resources in Spanish. We all have unique and valuable
skills we can use to contribute! Thanks for reading! In my spare time I write about education and
cool technology. I also develop educational resources for robotics.
